# Area potentials

This module performs geospatial analyses to determine the available land area for specific technologies, on a by-pixel basis and aggregated to given geographic boundaries (e.g. generated by [module_geo_boundaries](https://github.com/calliope-project/module_geo_boundaries).

## Overview

The analysis in this module is structured as follows:

* Geospatial input data (vector and raster) are acquired. This is automatic for most data, but the following data need to be manually supplied:
  * Geographic boundaries in the parquet format
  * WDPA protected areas database from https://www.protectedplanet.net/ in GeoDB format (choose 'File Geodatabase' when downloading).
* For the extent of the provided boundaries, the input data are reprojected and rasterised to the resolution of the land cover data (GlobCover), and merged into a single dataset for further processing.
* Based on the supplied configuration, the land-use analysis is done for each defined technology.
* Results can be reported on a per-geography and per-technology basis, as pixel surface area values (TIFF files), images for reporting purposes (PNG files), and also as a summary report with per-region capacities (CSV and HTML files)

See below for the [data sources](#data-sources).

## Configuration

Configure the analysis in the `config.yaml` file. Examples are visible in `config/config.yaml` and `tests/integration/test_config.yaml`.

In the configuration, you can define any number of `techs`, and for each of them, specify the `initial_area`, `continuous_layers`, and `binary_layers`.

By example, here is a `pv_rooftop` tech. We use the `settlement_area`, which is the settlement area in m² in each pixel, as the initial area from which the further analysis proceeds. In `continuous_layers`, we use the `settlement_share`, which is the share (0-1) of area covered by settlement, and exclude pixels with less than 0.01 settlement share while assuming that of those pixels not excluded by that, 0.8 (80%) of the settled area can be used for rooftop PV. Finally, in the `binary_layers`, we include all land use types except `NOT_SUITABLE` (since the main selection is done via the settlement_share). This means that, for example, `FOREST` pixels with a `settlement_area` > 0 can be included.

```yaml
pv_rooftop:
  initial_area: settlement_area
  continuous_layers:
    settlement_share:
      min: 0.01
      max: 1
      share: 0.8
  binary_layers:
    regions_maritime: 0
    regions_land: 1
    protected: 0
    landcover_FARM: 1
    landcover_FOREST: 1
    landcover_URBAN: 1
    landcover_OTHER: 1
    landcover_NOT_SUITABLE: 0
    landcover_WATER: 0
```

Here is a `wind_offshore` example. We start with the `pixel_area`, the total surface area in m² for each pixel. We include pixels with a slope up to and including 20 degrees, and exclude pixels with a settlement share above 0.01. Furthermore, we include only land areas (`regions_land: 1` and `regions_maritime: 0`) and completely exclude some areas like protected areas or urban areas (`protected: 0`, `landcover_URBAN: 0`), while including only a fraction of other areas (e.g. if a pixel is considered farmland, only 20% of its surface is available: `landcover_FARM: 0.2`).

```yaml
wind_onshore:
  initial_area: pixel_area
  continuous_layers:
    slope:
    min: 0
    max: 20
    settlement_share:
    min: 0
    max: 0.01
  binary_layers:
    regions_maritime: 0
    regions_land: 1
    protected: 0
    landcover_FARM: 0.2
    landcover_FOREST: 0.05
    landcover_URBAN: 0
    landcover_OTHER: 0.3
    landcover_NOT_SUITABLE: 0
    landcover_WATER: 0

```

## Data sources

* [GEDTM30](https://github.com/openlandmap/GEDTM30) for slope
    * License: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
* [GlobCover land cover data](https://due.esrin.esa.int/page_globcover.php)
    * License: "You may use the GlobCover land cover map for educational and/or scientific purposes, without any fee on the condition that you credit ESA and the Université Catholique de Louvain as the source of the GlobCover products."
* [GEBCO (General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans)](https://www.gebco.net/data-products/gridded-bathymetry-data) 15 arc-second data
    * License: "The GEBCO Grid is placed in the public domain and may be used free of charge. [...] Users must: Acknowledge the source of The GEBCO Grid. A suitable form of attribution is given in the documentation that accompanies The GEBCO Grid."
* [GHSL (Global Human Settlement Layer)](https://human-settlement.emergency.copernicus.eu/download.php) built-up surface data (R2023, GHS-BUILT-S, 100m resolution)
    * License: "The GHSL has been produced by the EC JRC as open and free data. Reuse is authorised, provided the source is acknowledged."
* [WDPA (World Database on Protected Areas)](https://www.protectedplanet.net/)
    * License: Non-commercial allowed. Citation: "UNEP-WCMC and IUCN (2025), Protected Planet: The World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA) and World Database on Other Effective Area-based Conservation Measures (WD-OECM) [Online], June 2025, Cambridge, UK: UNEP-WCMC and IUCN. Available at: www.protectedplanet.net."
